on behalf of the Commission on
Presidential Debates I am pleased to
welcome you to this first presidential
debate of the 1988 campaign I'm Jim
Lehrer of the macneil/lehrer Newshour my
colleagues on the panel are John Massey
of the Atlanta journal-constitution
& grower of the Orlando Sentinel and
Peter Jennings of ABC News for the next
90 minutes we will be questioning the
candidates for President of the United
States following a format designed and
agreed to by representatives of the two
candidates candidates our Vice President
George Bush the Republican nominee
governor Michael Dukakis the Democrat
[Applause]
our questions this evening will be about
equally divided between foreign and
domestic policy matters the first
question by agreement between the two
candidates goes to Vice President Bush
it is a domestic question you have two
minutes for an answer sir the polls say
the number one domestic issue to a
majority of voters is drugs what is
there about these times that drives or
draws so many Americans to use drugs I
think we've seen a deterioration of
values I think for a while as a nation
we condoned those things we should have
condemned for a while as I recall it
even seems to me that there was talk of
legalizing or decriminalizing marijuana
and other drugs and I think that's all
wrong so we've seen the deterioration in
values and one of the things that I
think we should do about it in terms of
cos is to instill values into the young
people in our schools we got away we got
into this feeling that value free
education was the thing and I don't
believe that at all I do believe there
are fundamental rights and wrongs as far
as use and of course as far as the how
we make it better yes we can do better
on interdiction but we've got to do a
lot better on enter in and we've got to
do a lot better on education and we have
to do a tougher on those who commit
crimes we've got to get after the users
more we have to change this whole
culture you know I saw a movie Crocodile
Dundee and I saw the cocaine scene
treated with humour as though this was a
humorous little incident and it's bad
everybody ought to be in this thing
entertainment industry people involved
in the schools education and it isn't a
republic
our Democrat or a liberal problem but we
have got to instill values in these
young people and I have put forward a
many point drug program that includes
what I would do as president of the
United States in terms of doing better
on interdiction and in terms of doing
better in the neighborhoods but I think
we're all in this together and my plea
to the American people is values in the
schools owner you have one minute to
respond I agree with mr. Bush that
values are important but it's important
that our leaders demonstrate those
values from the top that means those of
us who elected to positions of political
leadership have to reflect those values
ourselves here we are with a government
that's been dealing with a drug running
Panamanian dictator we've been dealing
with him he's been dealing drugs to our
kids and governors like me and others
have been trying to deal with the
consequences I remember being in a high
school in my own state as we were
organizing something we call the
governor's alliance against drugs and a
young 16 year old girl coming up to me
desperate addicted dependent saying
governor I need help we're providing
that young woman with help but I want to
be a President of the United States who
makes sure that we never again do
business with a drug-running Panamanian
dictator that we never again funnel a to
the Contras who convicted drug dealers
values begin at the top in the White
House those are the values I want a
being to bring to the presidency and of
the White House beginning at January of
1989 governor a follow-up question you
have two minutes to answer it are you
suggesting sir that President Reagan is
one of the causes of the drug problem in
this country I'm saying that those of us
who are elected to positions of
political leadership Jim have a special
responsibility not only to come up with
programs and I have outlined and
detailed very important very strong
program of enforcement as well as drug
education prevention and mr. Bush is
right the two go hand-in-hand
if our government itself is doing
business with people who we know are
engaged in drug profiteering and drug
trafficking
if we don't understand that that sends
out a very very bad message to our young
people and it's a little difficult for
me to understand just how we can reach
out to that youngster that I talked
about and young people like her all over
the country and say to them we want to
help you
now I've outlined in great detail
program for being tough on enforcement
at home and abroad doubling the number
of drug enforcement agents having a
hemispheric summit
soon after the 20th of January when we
bring our Democratic neighbors and
allies together here in this hemisphere
and go to work together but we also have
to take demands seriously you know we
have 5% of the world's population in
this country or consuming 50% of the
world's cocaine and in my state I'm
proud to say we've organized a drug
education prevention program which the
Federal Drug Enforcement Administration
says as a model to the country we're
helping youngsters we're reaching out to
them and we're beginning with drug
education and prevention beginning in
the early elementary grades and every
elementary school in in in our in our
state and and that's the kind of effort
we need in every elementary school in
the United States of America and we've
got to begin early in the 1st 2nd and
3rd grade before our youngsters begin to
experiment with these very very
dangerous substances I guess the
question I would ask of mr. Bush is how
we instill those values how we create
this environment for the drug-free
schools that we want in this country if
he or representatives the administration
are either dealing with and involving
people like Noriega in our foreign
policy or don't pursue that connection
in a way that makes it possible for us
to cut it off and to be an example to
our kids all over this country a minute
to rebut mr. vice president well the
other day my opponent was given a
briefing by the CIA I asked for and
received the same briefing I am very
careful in public life about dealing
with classified information and what I'm
about to say is unclassified 7
administration's were dealing with mr.
Noriega
it was the Reagan Bush administration
that bought this man to justice and as
the governor of Massachusetts
snows there was no evidence that
governor that that mr. Noriega was
involved in drugs no hard evidence until
we indicted him and so I think it's
about time we get this Noriega matter in
perspective Panama is a friendly country
I went down there and talked to the
president of Panama about cleaning up
their little Mundt money laundering and
mr. Noriega was there but there was no
evidence at that time and when the
evidence was there we indicted him and
we want to bring him to justice and so
call off all those pickets out there
that are trying to tear down seven
different administrations all right the
next question will be asked by John
magique it goes to governor Dukakis and
you will have two minutes to answer
governor Dukakis another troublesome
issue for voters this year is the
bulging federal deficit in a Dukakis
administration you say taxes will be
raised only as a last resort would you
identify for us then please three
specific programs that you are willing
to cut to bring that deficit down yes
and I've been very specific about those
John and let me lay out for you my own
strategy for bringing that deficit down
because as a chief executive of its
balanced ten budgets in a row I've had
to make those tough decisions and those
tough choices first I've suggested that
there are certain weapon systems which
we don't need we can't afford mr. Bush
has been critical of me for that but I
think those are the kinds of tough
choices you have to make I've also
suggested that there are weapons systems
that we should proceed on and I've
outlined those in detail secondly we've
got to invest in economic growth in this
country and every part of this country
building that kind of growth expands
revenues and helps to bring down that
deficit thirdly we have to bring
interest rates down and we will as we
come up with a good solid plan with a
Congress for bringing that deficit down
and finally we've got to go out there
and collect billions and billions of
dollars in taxes owed that aren't being
paid in this country it's very unfair to
the average taxpayer who pays his taxes
and pay them on it pays them on time to
permit these monies to go and collect it
I've also suggested that on the domestic
side there are areas where we can make
some cuts we ought to be able to come up
with an agricultural policy in this
country that you
our farm families a fair price and a
decent future without spending twenty to
twenty five billion dollars a year which
is what we've been doing under this
administration we can help people to
live better lives and at the same time
save money by helping hundreds of
thousands of families on welfare to get
off of welfare and to become productive
citizens again the thing I don't
understand about mr. Bush's approach to
this is how he could possibly be serious
about bringing that deficit down given
what he says he wants to do seems to
want to spend a great deal of money on
just about every weapon system
he says he's against new taxes although
he's broken that pledge at least three
times in the last year that I know he
wants to give the wealthiest taxpayers
in this country a five-year forty
billion dollar tax break and he also
wants to spend a lot of money on
additional program if he keeps this up
it's gonna be the Joe Isuzu of American
politics but
I hope you won't take my five seconds
away from me but I will say this it was
his upcoming if he's serious about what
he's saying then the only place he can
go to balance that budget is to raid the
Social Security trust fund and he tried
that in 1985 and I think he's going to
try it again you have a minute to rebut
this is the time to unleash our
one-liners that answer was about as
clear as Boston Harbor now
[Applause]
let me help the governor there's so many
things there I don't quite know where to
begin when you cut capital gains you put
people to work John Kennedy proposed
cutting capital gains Paul Tsongas a
liberal senator from Massachusetts said
the dumbest thing I did was to oppose
the capital gains cut it's not going to
cost the government money it's going to
increase revenues to the federal
government and it's gonna create jobs so
that's one of the things that I think
makes a big difference between us a
Massachusetts doesn't have an enormous
defense budget but nevertheless the
governor raised taxes five different
times that happens to be a fact and so
let's kind of stay on the issue and I
have made a specific proposal for what I
call a flexible freeze and it permits
economists on the East Coast in West
think is good it permits the President
to sort out the priorities and we
continue to grow because I will not
raise taxes you are your time is up to
follow up John mr. vice president you
have vowed not to raise taxes of any
kind during your administration and at
the same time you've proposed this
capital gains cut you propose more
incentive breaks for the oil industry
you've suggested new spending programs
and even some Republicans say the
flexible freeze you just spoke about
will hardly make a dent in the deficit
is the deficit no longer really a
concern of yours the Republican Party or
the taxpayers I think it's the
Republican party and my concern to bring
it down and presidential leadership that
I want to provide in this area will
bring it down but we've got to get the
Democrats Congress under control they do
all the spending they appropriate every
dime and tell us how to spend every dime
I'd like to ask the governor to join me
in getting for the president what
forty-three governors have the line-item
veto he has to operate in Massachusetts
under a balanced budget proviso I would
like a balanced budget amendment but the
dynamics of the economy we cut the taxes
and revenues are up by 25% in three
years so the problem is it's not that
the working man is being taxed too
little
or the person working out the woman
working in some factory being taxed too
little it is that we are continuing to
spend too much so my formula says grow
at the rate of inflation permit the
president to set the priorities on where
we do the spending and remember the
federal deficit has come down seventy
billion dollars in one year in 1987 and
if we and actually this year Congress is
doing a little better in controlling the
growth of spending spending was only up
something like four percent so it isn't
that we're taking too little food per
taxpayer we're spending too much still
and the formula I've given you works we
put it through a good economic model
we've got good economists on the west
coast Michael Baskin and Marty Feldstein
up there who's a very respected
economist in in the Massachusetts and
they agree that if we can do what I've
said we can get it down without going
and sucking the American taxpayer once
again and no capital gains one more
point on that please let's learn from
history a capital gains differential
will increase jobs increase risk-taking
increase revenues to the federal
government governor do you have a minute
to rebut I hope all of those Americans
out there who are watching us listening
to us and trying to make up their mind
about which one of us ought to be
President United States listen to the
vice president very carefully what he's
proposing after over a trillion dollars
in new debt which has been added to the
federal debt and of course the past
eight years an IOU that our children and
grandchildren will be paying for years
is a tax cut for the wealthiest 1% of
the people in this country an average of
about $30,000 that we're going to give
to people making $200,000 a year well
that's more than the average teacher
makes we've had enough of that ladies
and gentlemen we've run up more debt in
the last eight years and under all of
the presidents from George Washington
Jimmy Carter combined it's time for a
chief executive who can make tough
choices can work with the Congress can
get that deficit down and begin to build
a strong fiscal foundation under this
country all right the next question will
be asked
and roar and if go to the vice-president
you have two minutes dancers mr. vice
president you've said you want a kinder
gentler presidency one that helps the
less fortunate today 37 million
Americans including many working
families with aging parents and young
children cannot afford any health
insurance but earn too much to qualify
for Medicaid what will you do to provide
protection for them and how will you pay
for it one thing I will not do is suck
every business in the country and thus
throw some people out of work I want to
keep this economic recovery going
more Americans at work today than at any
time in history
a greater percentage of the workforce
what I will do is permit people to buy
into Medicaid I believe that's the
answer I am proud to have been part of
an administration that passed the first
catastrophic health bill and in that
there's some Medicaid some provisions
that will be very helpful to the kind of
people we're talking about here but
we've got to keep going forward without
killing off the engine and throwing
people out of work so the answer lies it
seems to me in full enforcement of the
catastrophic program it applies to me in
flexibility and Medicaid so people at
the lowest end can buy in there and get
their needs covered and then it also I
do not want to see us mandate across the
board that every every company has to do
this because I really think that
marginal operators are gonna go say we
can't make it and I think then you're
gonna see that that people are put out
of work all these programs and this
costs on his is was I saw an estimate
I'd love to know what he thinks thirty
five forty billion dollars and it seems
to me that somebody pays that there
isn't any such thing as something free
out there either gets passed along as
increased prices or it gets passed along
by people being put out of work so the
business can continue to compete so I
think we ought to do it in the Medicaid
system I think we ought to do it by full
enforcement of the catastrophic health
insurance I think we ought to do it by
everybody doing what they can do out of
conscience it's a terrible
in terms of the in terms of flexibility
on private insurances but I just don't
want to mandate it and risk putting this
setting like recovery back a rebuttal
governor George that's no answer
you know alas the answer but it was no
it's no answer to those 37 million
people most of the members of working
families that don't have a dime of
health insurance and don't know how to
pay the bills if the kids get sick at
night I was in Houston on Tuesday
meeting with a group of good citizens
working citizens all of them with little
or no health insurance one of them was a
father who had been laid off a few
months ago and lost his health insurance
has a little every year old son and
can't let that son compete with sports
and literally because he's afraid he's
going to get hurt you won't be able to
provide health insurance pay those bills
my state just became the only state in
the nation to provide for universal
health care and we did it with the
support of the business community and
labor and the health care community and
with virtually everybody in the state
the fact of the matter is that employers
who today are ensuring their employees
are paying the freight because they're
paying for those who aren't and I think
it's time that when you've got a job in
this country it came with health
insurance that's the way we're going to
provide basic health security for all of
the citizens of this country of ours
follow yes
since you're your Massachusetts health
plan has been attacked by the vice
president and you have defended it in
this way I'd like to move on to perhaps
one of the most costly medical
catastrophes facing Americans today and
that is AIDS
in at the end of September the thousands
of AIDS patients will lose their access
to AZT which is the only federally
approved drug for treatment of the
disease now I'd like to know sir if what
your position is on extending that and
what it is do you think the government
ought to be doing about making AZT and
other drugs available to people who are
suffering from this disease well yeah
let me just say before I answer your
question that I didn't know that the
boys president attacked our program in
Massachusetts I hope he hasn't because
it is one the support of a great many
people all over the state and I think
it's a model for what I hope we can do
across the country but when I proposed
my plan this past Tuesday he or one of
his
been called at socialized medicine the
last time our Vice President used that
phrase I suspect he remembers it don't
you it was in 1964 and that's what he
called Medicare well he was wrong then
he's wrong now
fine name let's me all children excuse
me governor if I may interrupt at this
point and caution the audience as I did
before we went on the air please hold it
down
that's only God you're only taking time
away from your candidate when you do
that governor continue please let me say
this about AIDS it's the single most
important public health crisis single
most important public health emergency
we've had in our lifetimes and I think
there are a number of things we have to
do including supporting legislation
which is now moving through the Congress
which will commit this nation to the
resources to find a cure which will
provide broad education and prevention
which will provide sensitive and caring
treatment for the victims of AIDS I
think we have to demonstrate some
flexibility and I think the FDA is
attempting to do so now in trying to
make it possible for new and
experimental drugs to be available to
the people who are at risk at AIDS and I
would hope that we could bring that kind
of a policy to bear a beginning in
January and I would encourage the
current administration to proceed with
with that kind of flexibility where it's
appropriate and where it's done
carefully and responsibly but we have
not had the kind of leadership we should
have had in this particular area I think
the Vice President I are in general
agreement on what we have to do the
special federal Commission made good
solid recommendations I think we're both
supportive of them and and I would
strongly lead in that area as I have in
my state as governor mr. vice president
a minute rebuttal well we're on the
right track the NIH is doing a good job
in research the Surgeon General is doing
a good job in encouraging the proper
kind of education I noticed that the
governor did not mention any testing but
we got to have a knowledge base testing
should be confidential but we have to
have a knowledge base we can't simply
stick our heads in the sand in terms of
testing I'm chairman of the president's
Task Force on regulatory relief and we
are working with the FDA and they have
sped up bringing drugs to market that
can help and you got to be careful here
because there's a safety factor but I
think these things and then also I am
one who believes we've got to go the
extra mile in clean being sure that that
blood supply
is is pure we cannot have a lack of
confidence in the blood supply when it
comes to operations and surgery and
things of this nature so research
speeding the drugs to market testing
blood supply are very important elements
of this next question will be asked by
Peter Jennings it goes to the governor
he mr. vice president governor yeah
governor one theme that theme that keeps
coming up about the way you've governed
you've both mentioned leadership tonight
so I'd like to stay with that for a
second the theme that keeps coming up
about the way you governed is
passionless technocratic passion less
passion less technocratic the smartest
clerk in the world your critics maintain
that in the 1960s your public passion
was not the war in Vietnam or civil
rights but no-fault auto insurance they
say that in the 1970s you played
virtually no role in the painful busing
crisis in Boston given the fact that a
president must sometimes lead by sheer
inspiration and passion we need to know
if this is a fair portrait of your
governing or is it a stereotype and if
it isn't fair you give us an example of
where you have had that passion and
leadership that sometimes the president
needs Peter I care deeply about people
all people working people working
families people all over this country
who in some cases are living from
paycheck to paycheck
in other cases are having a hard time
opening up the door of college
opportunity to their children in other
cases don't have basic health insurance
which for most of us we accept as a
matter of course and assume we're going
to have in order to pay the bills that
we incur when we get sick I'm somebody
who believes deeply in genuine
opportunity for every single citizen in
this country and that's the kind of
passion I brought to my state I was a
leader in the civil rights movement in
my state and in my legislature I cared
very deeply about that war in Vietnam I
thought it was a mistake I thought it
was wrong and I was one of the few
legislators early in that war that took
a stand against the war I think was the
right stand at the time and I think
history has proved us to be correct
but I have learned over time I serve one
term I was defeated as you know and
defeat sometimes is an important lesson
I think I'm much better governor today I
think I'm a much better person a much
better listener
I think I'll be a much better president
for having gone through that experience
but the things that we have done in my
state to bring opportunity to people on
public assistance over 50,000 families
on welfare that we've helped to move
from welfare to work and to be Punk
become productive citizens the universal
health care bill that we just talked
about which will guarantee health care
for all of our citizens the opening up
of opportunity to minorities in my state
affirmative action I mean already
contracting you know the fact that we
have a 3% unemployment rate and more
jobs and people to fill them which gives
us a tremendous opportunity to reach out
to everybody and make them a part of
this wonderful nation of ours and the
opportunity that we create these are
things that I believe in very very
deeply I may be a little cama than some
about it I may be a greater consensus
builder these days and I used to be and
I think that's a good thing but I'm
running for the presidency of the United
States I've been in public service for
25 years because I believe deeply in
American goals and values and in the
people of this country and that's the
kind of president I want to be mr. vice
president a rebuttal well I don't
question his passion I questioned and I
don't question his concern about the war
in Vietnam he introduced or supported
legislation back then it suggested that
kids from Massachusetts should be exempt
from going overseas in that war now
that's a certain passion but in my view
it's misguided passion he we have a big
difference on issues you see last year
in the primary he expressed his passion
he said I am a strong liberal Democrat
August 87 then he said I am a
card-carrying member of the ACLU that
was what he said he is out there on out
of the mainstream he is very passionate
my argument with the governor
do we want this country to go that far
left and I wish we had time to let me
explain but I salute him for his passion
we just have a big difference on where
this country should be led and in what
direction it ought to go Peter a
question question for the vice president
Peter I'd I'd like to follow up if I may
on this on this mention you've made if
it's card-carrying membership in the
American Civil Liberties Union you used
the phrase card-carrying so many times
since governor Dukakis first
acknowledged that he was a card-carrying
member of the ACLU that some people some
people have come to believe that you've
used it in to brand him in some way to
identify him as people were identified
in the 1950s as less than patriotic I'd
like to know why you keep repeating the
phrase what's the important issue here
what is so wrong with the governor being
a member of an organization which has
come to the defense of among other
people Colonel Oliver North nothing's
wrong with it but just take a look at
the positions of the just take a look at
the positions of the ACLU but Peter
please understand the Liberals do not
like me talking about liberal they don't
like it when I say that he says he's a
card-carrying member now if that quote
was wrong he can repudiate it right here
I've seen it authoritative Lee written
twice and if I've done him an injustice
and he didn't say it I'm very very sorry
but I don't agree with a lot of most of
the positions of the ACLU I simply don't
want to see the ratings on movies I
don't want my 10 year old grandchild to
go into a x-rated movie I'd like those
rating systems I don't think they're
right to try to take the tax exemption
away from the Catholic Church I don't
want to see their kitty
pornographic Laws repealed I don't want
to see under God come out from our
currency now these are all positions of
the ACLU and I don't agree with them he
has every right to exercise his passion
as what he said a strong progressive
liberal I don't agree with that I come
from a very different point of view
and I think I'm more in touch with the
the mainstream of America they raised
the same thing with me on the pledge of
allegiance you see I'd have found a way
to sign that bill governor Thompson of
Illinois did not questioning his
patriotism he goes out and says man is
questioning my patriotism and then all
the liberal columnist join in I am NOT I
am questioning his judgment on these
matters or where he's coming from is
every right to do it but I believe
that's not what the American people want
and when he said when he said at the
convention idealogy doesn't matter just
competence he was moving away from his
own record from what his passion has
been over the years and that's all I'm
trying to do is put it in focus and I
hope people don't think that I am
questioning his patriotism when I say he
use his words to describe his his
participation in that organization Evon
urgent response well I hope this is the
first and last time I have to say this
course the vice president's questioning
my patriotism I don't think is any
question about that and I resent it I
resent it my parents came to this
country as immigrants they taught me
that this was the greatest country in
the world I'm in public service because
I love this country I believe in it and
nobody's going to question my patriotism
as the vice president has now repeatedly
the fact of the matter is that if the
pledge of allegiance was the acid test
of one's patriotism vice president's
been the presiding officer in the United
States Senate for the past seven and a
half years the best of my knowledge he's
never once suggested that the session of
the Senate begin with the Pledge of
Allegiance
I don't mr. Bush I don't question your
patriotism when you're attacked for your
military record I immediately said that
it was inappropriate it had no place in
this campaign and I rejected it I would
hope that from this point on we get to
the issues that affect the vast majority
of Americans jobs schools health care
housing the environment those are the
concerns of the people that are watching
us tonight not labels that we at
attached to each other questions about
each other's patriotism loyalty time's
up governor let's go now to John magic
again question for the vice president
mr. vice president in a debate during
the Republican primaries you said most
of the nation's homeless are suffering
from mental illness an assertion
immediately challenged by one of your
rivals estimates of the homeless range
from a low of 250,000 by the government
to around 3 million including working
families and their children what
commitment are you willing to make
tonight to this voiceless segment of our
society I want to see the mckinney act
fully funded I believe that that would
help in terms of shelter I want to see
when I talked at our at our convention
about a thousand points of light I was
talking about the enormous numbers of
shelters and organizations that help the
governor's wife been very active in the
homeless my my campaign chairman
secretary Jim Baker's wife is it in
government these are people that care
that are trying to give of themselves
the government has a role it is to fully
fund the McKenney Act there are certain
army bases that the Act calls for that
can be used in certain cases to shelter
people when it's rough and so I think
that we're on the right track I don't
see this incidentally as a Democrat or
Republican or a liberal or conservative
idea I see an involvement by a thousand
points of light I see the funding that
is required and I hope that Congress
will fully fund this bill they David a
great deal of conscience and a great
deal of work and we're on the right
track on this one but and I look mental
that was a little overstated it I'd say
around 30 percent and I think maybe we
could look back over our shoulders and
wonder whether it was right to let all
those mental patients out maybe we do
need to do a better job in mental
clinics to help help them because there
is a major problem there a lot of them
are mentally sick we've got to attend to
them but fully my short range answer is
fully fund that McKinney Act
governor a response
well this is another fundamental
difference that I have and with the
vice-president just as I do in the case
of health care for 37 million members of
working families in this country who
don't have health insurance the problem
is to Bush is that you've cut back by 90
percent on our commitment to affordable
housing for families of low and moderate
income and when you do that you have
homeless families we didn't have two and
a half million or three men and homeless
people living on streets and in doorways
in this country 10 years ago we've got
to begin to get back to the business of
building and rehabilitating housing for
families of low and moderate income in
this country housing for young families
that they can look forward Sunday to buy
we've got communities in this country
increasingly where our own kids can't
afford to live and the communities that
they grew up in that's an essential
commitment and I think the housing
community is ready but it's going to
take a president who's committed a
housing who's had experience in building
and rehabilitating housing who
understands that affordable housing for
families of low and moderate income for
young families first-time homebuyers
is an essential part of the American
dream and while I'm all for the mckinney
bill that by itself simply won't do
we've got to have a present that can
lead on this issue that can work with
the Congress and I'm prepared to do so
this is one of the most important
priorities that faces this country the
only question for the governor governor
you've mentioned the American dream of
home ownership and it's certainly become
an impossible and for many of the young
people of our nation who are caught up
in this economic squeeze of the middle
class as you've said so frequently
during the campaign and yet in spite of
your answer just a few minutes ago what
promise can you realistically hold out
to these people that with the costs of
housing going up and with limited help
available from Washington are we
destined to become a nation of renters
well I certainly hope not and it's all a
question of what a priorities are which
talked about values I agree with him
what are our venn isn't providing
housing for families of low and moderate
income isn't it making possible for
young families first-time homebuyers to
own their own home Sunday something
that's part of the American Dream I
think so you know back after World War
two when we had hundreds of thousands of
GIS who came back from the war we didn't
sit around we went out
built housing the government was very
much involved so it was the housing
industry so it was the banking industry
so we're housing advocates so we're
nonprofit agencies so we're governor's
mayor's people all over this country who
believe deeply in homeownership and
affordable housing now that's the kind
of leadership that I want to provide as
president the United States this isn't a
question of a little charity for the
homeless this is a question of
organizing the housing community I've
talked to bankers and builders and
developers the housing adverts advocates
the community development agencies and
they want leadership from Washington
Washington by itself can't do it all we
should expect that but governor's
already mayor's are ready builders and
community leaders are ready it will
require some funds John and we ought to
be prepared to provide those funds but
that true tool will will require some
choices mr. Bush wants to spend billions
and trillions on Star Wars well that's a
choice we have to make isn't it do we
spend money on that weapon system in the
billions and trillions or is providing
some decent and affordable housing for
families of this country something that
isn't at least as important and probably
more so because it's so essential to our
economic strength and to our future
that's the kind of predecessor
presidency I believe in and simply to
say well the mckinney bill will do it
just doesn't do we need a president who
will lead on this issues had experience
on this issue it's the kind of priority
that will be at the top of our list
beginning in January of 1989 a response
mr. Paws I think the governor is
blurring housing and the homeless let's
talk about housing which the question
was when you talk to those bankers did
they discuss where interest rates were
when your party controlled the White
House ten days before I took the oath of
office as president they were 21 and a
half percent and how does that grab you
for increasing housing housing is up we
are serving a million more families now
but we're not going to do it and that
old Democratic liberal way of trying to
build more bricks and mortars go out and
take a look at st. Louis at some of that
effort it is wrong I favor home
ownership I want to see more Val
sure's I want to see tenant control of
some of these projects and I want to
keep the interest rates down they're
half now of what they were when we came
into office and with my policy of
getting this deficit under control
they'll be a lot less but if we spend
and spend and spend that is going to
wrap up the housing market and we'll go
right back to the days of the misery
index and malaise that President Reagan
and I have overcome thank God for the
United States on that one all right the
next question is to the governor and
grower we'll ask governor Dukakis is
there a conflict between your opposition
to the death penalty and your support
for abortion on demand even though in
the minds of many people that's also
killing no I don't think there is there
are two very different issues here and
they've got to be dealt with separately
I'm opposed to the death penalty I think
everybody knows that I'm also very tough
on violent crime and and that's one of
the reasons why my state has cut crime
by more than any other industrial state
in America it's one of the reasons why
we have the lowest murder rate of any
industrial state in the country it's one
of the reasons why we have a drug
education and Prevention Program that is
reaching out and helping youngsters all
over our state the kind of thing I want
to do is as president the United States
you know the vice president says he
wants to impose the death penalty on
drug traffickers and yet his
administration has a federal furlough
program which is one of the most
permissive in the country in which gave
last year 7,000 furloughs to drug
traffickers and drug pushers the same
people that he says he now wants to
execute the issue of abortion is a very
difficult issue one that I think we all
have to wrestle with we have to come to
terms with
I don't favor abortion I don't think
it's a good thing I don't think most
people do the question is who makes the
decision and I think it has to be the
woman in the exercise of her own
conscience and religious beliefs that
makes that decision response mr. Weiser
well the Massachusetts furlough program
was unique it was the only one in the
nation that furloughed murderers who had
not served enough time to be eligible
for parole the federal program doesn't
do that no other state programs do that
and therefore and I favor the death
penalty I know it's tough and honest
people can disagree but when up when a
narcotics wrapped up guy goes in and
murders a police officer I think they
ought to pay with their life and I do
believe it would be inhibiting and so I
am NOT going to furlough men like Willie
Horton and I would meet with they're the
victims of his last escapade the rape
and the brutalization of the family down
there in Maryland Maryland would not
extradite Willie Horton the man who was
furloughed the murderer because they
didn't want him to be furloughed again
and so we have a fundamental difference
on this one and I think most people know
my position on the sanctity of life
I favor adoption I do not favor abortion
question for the vice-president man yes
mr. vice president I'd like to stay with
abortion for just a moment if I might
over the years you have expressed
several positions while opposing nearly
all forms of government payment for it
you now say that you support abortion
only in cases of rape incest or threat
to a mother's life and you also support
a constitutional amendment that if
ratified without law most abortions but
if abortions were to become illegal
again do you think that the women who
defy the law and have them any way as
they did before it was okayed by the
Supreme Court and the doctors who
perform them should go to jail I I
haven't sorted out the penalties but I
do know I do know that I oppose abortion
and I favor adoption and we can if we
can get this law changed with everybody
should make the extraordinary effort to
take these kids that are unwanted and
sometimes aboard to take the take that
let them come to come to a birth and
then put them in a family where there'll
be love
and you see yes I my position has
evolved and it's continuing to evolve
and it's evolving in favor of life and I
have a cat a couple of exceptions that I
support rape incest and the life of the
mother sometimes people feel a little
uncomfortable talking about this but
it's much clearer for me now as I've
seen abortion sometimes used as a birth
control device for heaven's sakes see
the millions of these killings
accumulate and this is one where you can
have an honest difference of opinion we
certainly do but no I'm for the sanctity
of life and once that illegality is
established then we can come to grips
with the penalty side and of course
there's got to be some penalties to
enforce enforce the law whatever they
may be governor well I think what the
Vice President is saying is that he's
prepared to brand a woman a criminal for
making this decision as simple as that I
don't think it's enough to come before
the American people who are watching us
tonight and say well I haven't sorted it
out this is a very very difficult and a
fundamental decision that all of us have
to make and what he is saying if I
understand him correctly is that he's
prepared to brand a woman a criminal for
making this choice I just said I think
that's you know let me finish yesterday
let me simply say that I think it has to
be the woman in the exercise of her own
conscience and religious beliefs that
makes that decision I think that's the
right approach the right decision and I
would hope by this time that mr. Bush
had sorted out this issue and come to
terms with it as I have I respect his
right to disagree with me but I think
it's important that we have a position
that we take it and we stated to the
American people Peter Jennings a
question for the vice president mr. vice
president I'm struck by your your
discussion of women and the sanctity of
life and it leads me to to recall your
own phrase that you are haunted by the
lives which children in our inner cities
live in certainly the evidence is
compelling there's an explosion of
single-parent families and by any
measure these single-parent families
many with unwanted children
are the source of poverty school
dropouts crime which many people in the
inner city simply feel as out of control
if it haunts you
so why over the eight years of the
Reagan Bush administration have so many
programs designed to help the inner city
has been eliminated or cut one of the
reasons and I first would like to know
which programs are talking about then we
could talk on the merits of the programs
but you see my fundamental philosophy is
give local and state government as much
control as possible that might be the
explanation if you tell me the program I
do strongly support the WIC program I
think it is good I think part of the
answer to this haunting of these
children that are that are out there and
suffering is lies in extension of
Medicaid to challenge the states and
maybe maybe we're gonna have to enforce
more on the states in terms of Medicaid
taking care of these but but Peters so
much of it is gets into a whole other
phase of things the neighborhood the
kind of environment people are growing
up in and that leads me to the programs
I'm talking about in terms of education
I think part of it is the crime infested
neighborhoods and that's why I'm a
strong believer in in trying to control
crimes in the neighborhood why I was so
pleased to be endorsed by the policeman
on the beat the Boston Police Department
the other day I think they understand my
commitment to helping them in the
neighborhoods and so it's a combination
of these things but do not erode out of
the system the thousand points of light
the people that are out there trying to
help these kids the programs like cities
and schools the work that Barbara Bush
is doing so people can learn to read in
this country and then go on and get
break this cycle of poverty I'm for Head
Start and moving that up and I've
already made a proposal yes it'll cost
some money but I favor that so these are
the combination things I want and the
fact that I don't think the federal
government can endorse a 35 billion
dollar program does not mean I have less
compassion than the person who endorses
such a program governor
well I must have been living through a
different eight years from the one that
the vice president's been living through
because this administration is cut and
slashed and cutting slash programs for
children for nutrition or the kinds of
things that can help these youngsters to
live better lives has cut federal aid to
education and has cut Pell grants and
loans to close the door to college
opportunity on youngsters all over this
country and that too is a major
difference between the vice-president
and me let me just give you another
example we have a great many people
hundreds of thousands of people living
on public assistance in this country the
50 governors of this nation have
proposed to the Congress that we help
those families to get off of welfare
help those youngsters help their mothers
to become independent and
self-sufficient it's taken months and
months and months to get mr. Bush and
the administration to support that
legislation and they're still resistant
now that's the way you help people being
haunted a thousand points of light I
don't know what that means I know what I
know what strong political leadership is
I know what's happened over the course
of the past eight years these programs
have been cut and slashed and butchered
and they've hurt kids all over this
country the question for the governor
Peter governor the crisis is no less a
crisis for you if you were elected
president where would you get the money
to devote to the inner cities which is
clearly needed and can you be specific
about the programs not only you'd
reinstate but the more imaginative ones
that you'd begin well I said a few
minutes ago Peter that you can improve
the lives of families and youngsters and
save money at the same time welfare
reform is one way to do it if we invest
in job training in child care for those
youngsters in some extended health
benefits so that that mother and her
kids don't lose their health benefits
when she goes to work we can help
literally hundreds of thousands if not
millions of families to get off of
welfare to become independent and
self-sufficient to be taxpaying citizens
and to improve their lives the quality
of lives their futures and the futures
of those children that's just one
example of how you can save money and
improve the quality of life at the same
time
in my own State for example we now have
that universal health care system which
the vice president opposes I think very
unwisely one of the greatest barriers to
opportunity for a family and for those
children is the threat that they may
lose their health insurance think about
that father down there in Houston who
has to tell his youngster that he can't
play a little league ball he can't go
out on that ball field because he's
afraid he's going to get hurt and yet
mr. Bush says well I don't think we
ought to expect businesses to provide
health insurance for their employees
when responsible employers a majority of
employers in this country do and are
paying more for their insurance to
reimburse hospitals for free care on
account of people that are not employed
that are not insured that they'd have to
go to that hospital so these are the
ways that you help families you help
youngsters to live better lives and more
decent lives and we're ready to go to
work at the state and local level all of
us I know the private sector is people
are all over the country but it takes
presidential leadership it takes a
commitment to being involved in the
leading and that's the kind of
presidency I want to lead vice president
what troubles me is that when I talk of
the voluntary sector and a thousand
points of light in a thousand different
ways to help on these problems the man
has just said he doesn't understand what
I'm talking about and this is the
problem I have with the big spending
liberals they think the only way to do
it is for the federal government to do
it all the fact happens to be that
education spending is up by the federal
government it is up it is not down the
federal but here's the point he misses
the federal government spends 7 percent
of the total money on education and the
rest of the state governments and local
governments and the thousand points of
light and I'm talking about private
schools and private church schools and
things of this nature or putting up 93%
but the federal spending for education
is up and I want to be the education
president because I want to see us do
better we're putting more money per
child into education and we are not
performing as we should we've gotten
away from the value
and the fundamentals and I would like to
urge the school superintendents and the
others around the country to stand up
now and keep us moving forward on a path
towards real excellence and we can do it
but it's not going to be dictated by
some stroke bureaucracy in Washington DC
all right let's move now to some
questions on foreign and national
security policy John Masek will ask the
first question of the governor governor
the vice president continually refers to
your lack of experience weakness naivete
on foreign policy and national security
matters he says you are prepared to
eliminate weapon systems that will
result in the unilateral disarmament of
this country is that true course not
first that's a charge that's always made
against any governor who runs for the
presidency I think it was one of the
things mr. Bush said about mr. Reagan
back in 1980 under that choice and yet
some of our finest presidents some of
our strongest international leaders were
governors Franklin Roosevelt Woodrow
Wilson Theodore Roosevelt it's not the
amount of time you spent in Washington
that's not the length of your resume
it's your strength it's your values it's
the quality of the people you pick it's
your understanding of the forces of
change that are sweeping the world and
whether or not you're in a position to
provide leadership to make those forces
of change work for us and not against us
vice president is a long resume but it
didn't stop him from endorsing the sale
of arms the Ayatollah and we now know
that he was not out of the loop he was
in meeting after meeting after meeting
listening to secretary Shultz and
secretary Weinberger opposing that and
yet he supported it his experience
didn't prevent him from participating or
involving or in some way being involved
in the relationship between this
government and mr. Noriega and drug
trafficking in Panama he went to the
Philippines in the early 80s and
commended Ferdinand Marcos for his
commitment to democracy and he continues
to support a failed policy in Central
America which is getting worse and worse
and which is in fact increased Cuban and
Soviet influence in that region so I
don't believe that the fact that you've
got that long resume or had that
experience is the real question the
question is values the question is
strength the question is your
willingness to provide the kind of
leadership that must be provided I'm
ready to provide that leadership I want
to be the commander-in-chief of this
country I think it takes fresh
leadership now and an understanding of
those forces have changed to provide the
kind of strength that we need and
perhaps the vice president can explain
what he was doing we supported the
trading of arms to a terrorist nation
and his involvement in Panama and that
endorsement of mr. Marcos but I don't
think it's just experience that makes a
difference it's frankly societies I
thought the question was about defense
the governor was for a nuclear freeze
that would have locked in a thousand
Soviet intermediate nuclear force
weapons and zero for the west and
because we didn't listen to the freeze
advocates and strengthen the defenses of
this country we now have the first arms
control agreement in the nuclear age now
we're sitting down and talking to the
Soviets about strategic arms and he
wants to do away with a midget man in
the MX the modernization of our nuclear
nuclear capability that is not the way
you deal with the Soviets I've met mr.
Gorbachev met mr. Scheffer Nancy and
talked substance with him the other day
these people are tough but now we have a
chance if we have the experience and
know how to handle it but please do not
go back to the days when the military
was as weak as they could be when the
morale was down and we were and we were
the laughingstock around the world and
now we are back because we have
strengthened the defenses of this
country and believe me I don't want to
see us return to those days as de
ferdinand mark is he in there anymore it
was under our administration that mrs.
aquino came in but i'll tell you what i
was thinking of I flew a combat mission
my last one was over Manila and he was
down there fighting against imperialism
and he had just lifted martial law and
he had just called for new elections and
all of those things happen because the
Philippines do crave democracy and me
mr. Hoge brother out he goes vice
president your time was up John a
question for the vice president mr. vice
president the governor has suggested
you've never met a weapon system that
you didn't like or want are you prepared
to tell the voters one system in this
time of tight budget Airy restraints and
problems at the Pentagon that you'd be
willing to cut or even eliminate that
wouldn't endanger national security I
don't think it's a question of
eliminating I can tell them some I'm
against a six F for example D vaad and I
can go on and on
Minuteman three penetration systems I
mean there's plenty of that I oppose but
what I am NOT going to do when we are
negotiating with the Soviet Union
sitting down talking to mr. Gorbachev
about how we achieve a 50% reduction in
our strategic weapons I'm not going to
give away a couple of aces in that very
tough card game I'm simply not going to
do that and under me when I lead this
country the Secretary of Defense is
going to have to make the choices
between how we keep how we protect the
survivability of our of our nuclear
weapons we are going to make some
changes and some tough choices before we
go to deployment on the midget man
missile or on the on the Minuteman
whatever it is we're going to have to
the MX MX we're going to have to do that
it's Christmas
wouldn't it be nice to be perfect to be
the Iceman so you never make a mistake
the these are the these are the these
are the my answer is do not make these
unilateral cuts and everybody now
realizes that peace through strength
works and so this is where I have a big
difference of course we're gonna have to
make some determination on this and
we're gonna have to make it on
conventional forces but now we've got a
very good concept called competitive
strategies we will do what we do best
it's a strategy that we've been working
on for a couple of years it is going to
take us to much better advantage in
conventional forces but look let me sum
it up I want to be the president it gets
conventional forces in balance I want to
be the one to banish the chemical and
biological weapons from the face of the
earth but you have to have a little bit
of experience to know where to start and
I think I've had that governor well
first let me say with respect to the
freeze that back at the spring of 1982
mr. Bush was a lot more sympathetic in
the freeze and he seems to be today as a
matter of fact he said it was not it
should not be a subject of partisan
demagoguery because it was too important
to the United States or for the world
I didn't hear John exactly where he was
going to cut and what he was going to do
but I know this we have serious
financial problems in this country we've
piled up over a trillion dollars in debt
and the next president United States is
going to have to make some choices mr.
Bush wants to spend billions and star
wars he apparently wants to spend
billions on the MX on railroad cars a
weapon system we don't need and can't
afford
I thought the administration was opposed
to the midget man I thought the
administration was at the negotiating
table in Geneva suggesting that we've
been mobile missile systems entirely but
those are the choices the next press the
United States is going to have to make I
am for the stealth I'm for the d5 and
for going ahead with the advanced cruise
missile but I don't think we need these
other systems I don't think we need them
to remain strong we've got to move ahead
with the strategic arms negotiation
process with a comprehensive test-ban
treaty and with negotiations leading to
conventional force reduction in Europe
whatever cuts on the Soviet side and
senator Benson and I will
sooo that policy and grower a question
for the vice-president
well mr. vice president you said you met
with secretary-general Gorbachev you
have met with mister Shevardnadze but
for the last 40 years Americans have
been taught to regard the Soviet Union
as the enemy yet President Reagan has
signed two arms control treaties and
he's promised to share Star Wars
technology with the very country he once
called the evil empire so perhaps you
could tell us this evening should we be
doing a lot to help the economics and
the social development of a country that
we have so long regarded as an adversary
what I think we ought to do is take a
look at perestroika and and glass knows
welcome them but keep our eyes open be
cautious because the Soviet change is
not fully established yet yes I think
it's fine to do business with them but I
don't want to see us exporting our
highly sensitive national security or
security oriented technology to the
Soviet Union I don't want to see us
making unilateral cuts in our strategic
systems while we are negotiating with
them and so I'm encouraged by what I see
when I talk to mr. Gore what I hear when
I talk to mr. Gorbachev and mr. Scheffer
Nazi but can they pull it off and when
they have a they have a deals that are
good for us as China started to do the
changes in China since Barbara and I
lived there as absolutely amazing in
terms of incentive and partnerships and
things of this nature and now the Soviet
Union seems to be walking down that same
path we should encourage that we ought
to say this is good but where I differ
with my opponent is I am NOT going to
make unilateral cuts in our strategic
defense systems or support some freeze
when they have superiority I'm not going
to do that because I think the jury is
still out on the Soviet experiment and
the interesting place one of the things
that fascinates me about this
perestroika and glass house is what's
going to happen in eastern Eastern
Europe you see the turmoil in in Poland
today and I think we have enormous
opportunity for trade I don't want to go
back to the
Carter drain embargo on the Soviets we
are once again reliable suppliers and I
would never use food as a political tool
like our predecessors did but this is an
exciting time but all I'm suggesting is
let's not be naive in dealing with the
Soviets and make a lot of unilateral
cuts hoping against hope that they will
they will match our bid look at the INF
treaty and if we haven't learned from
the negotiating history on that we'll
never learn the freeze people were wrong
most the Reagan Bush administration was
right Susan governor Dukakis a very
different George Bush who was talking
much more sympathetically about the
freeze in the spring of 1982 than he is
today and you were right then George
when you said that it was no time for
partisan demagoguery nobody is
suggesting that we unilaterally disarm
somehow reduce our strength of course
not what we're talking about is a
combination of a strong and effective
incredible nuclear deterrent strong
well-equipped well-trained well
maintained conventional forces and at
the same time a willingness to move
forward steadily thoughtfully cautiously
we have serious differences with the
Soviet Union we have very fundamental
differences about human rights democracy
and in our basic system our basic view
of human beings and of what life is all
about but there are opportunities there
now senator Benson and I have a plan for
the 1990s and beyond mr. bush and mr.
Quayle do not and we want to pursue that
plan in a way which will bring down the
level of nuclear armament will build a
more stable in a more peaceful world and
we can do so while making choices here
at home let's not forget that our
national security and our Economic
Security go hand-in-hand we cannot be
strong militarily when we're
teeter-tottering on top of a mountain of
debt which has been created in the past
eight years that's why we need a
democratic administration in Washington
in 1939 and
a question for the governor yes governor
Dukakis speaking of seeming changes of
position you have gone from calling the
Strategic Defense Initiative or Star
Wars a fantasy and a fraud to saying
recently you would continue SDI research
and might even deploy the system if
Congress supported such move why the
change of heart no there's been no
change of heart I've said from the
beginning that we ought to continue
research into the strategic system at
about the level it was at in 1983 that's
about a billion dollars a year but I
don't know of any reputable scientists
who believe that this system at least is
originally conceived could possibly work
this notion of some kind of a Astrodome
over ourselves that could protect us
from enemy attack makes real sense and
as a matter of fact the system that the
administration is now talking about is
very different from the one that was
originally proposed in 1983 so I'm for
continued research but I also want
strong conventional forces now the other
day mr. Bush said well if we continued
with star war star wars we'd have to cut
someplace yes and told us where we know
where they're cutting we know where
you're cutting right now you're cutting
into the fiber and muscle of our
conventional forces you're cutting back
on maintenance and equipment there's an
Air Force general not too long ago in
Europe who said that pretty soon we'd
have airplanes without engines tank
commanders we can't drive that tanks
more than three-quarters of a mile
because they don't have enough fuel
Coast Guard cutters tied up at the dock
this summin not patrolling there's
supposed to be our first line of defense
against drugs and the war against drugs
because they don't have enough fuel you
have to make choices we're not making
those choices and to spend billions and
billions of dollars is mr. Bush
apparently wants to although he himself
has been all over the lot on this issue
lately on star wars in my judgment makes
no sense at all we need a strong
credible effective nuclear deterrent we
have 13,000 strategic nuclear warheads
right now on land on seeing in the air
enough to blow up the Soviet Union 40
times over they have about 12,000 so
we've got to move forward with those
negotiations get the level of strategic
weapons down but to continue to commit
billion
- this system makes no sense at all and
I think mr. Bush has been reconsidering
his position over the course of the past
few weeks less at least that's what I
read maybe he'll tell us where he stands
on it tonight mr. vice president I'm not
reconsidering my position two questions
how do you deter nuclear attack without
modernizing our nuclear forces when the
Soviets are modernizing and how come you
spend and willing to spend a dime on
something that you consider a fantasy
and a fraud those are two - rhetorical
questions he is a man on conventional
forces it wants to eliminate - carrier
battle groups the armed forces the
conventional forces of the United States
have never been more ready every single
one of the Joint Chiefs will testify to
the fact that readiness is an in
historic high and secondly in terms of
the cutting of the Coast Guard it was
the Congress the Democratic controlled
Congress so please help us with that
who cut seventy million dollars from the
Coast Guard out of the introduction
effort on narcotics he's got to get this
thing more clear why do you spend a
billion dollars on something you think
is a fantasy in a fraud I will fully
research it go forward as fast as we can
we've set up the levels of funding and
when it is deployable I will deploy it
that's my position on SDI and it's never
wavered a bit Peter Jennings a question
for governor Dukakis well governor and
vice president Bush you've both talked
tonight about hard choices let me try to
give you one somewhere in the Middle
East tonight nine Americans are being
held hostage if you are
commander-in-chief and Americans are
held hostage what will be more important
to you their individual fate their
individual thing or the commitment that
the United States government must never
negotiate with terrorists and if any
Americans are held hostage and you
become president to what lengths would
you go to rescue them Peter it's one of
the most agonizing decisions the
president has to make these are American
citizens we care deeply about them if
families care deeply about them want
them back and understandably so and we
want to do everything we can to bring
them back
but if there's one thing we also
understand it is that you can not make
concessions to terrorists ever ever
because if you do it's an open
invitation to other terrorists to take
hostages into blackmail and that's the
tragedy of the iran-contra scandal as a
matter of fact mr. Bush was the chairman
of a task force in international
terrorism which issued a report shortly
before that decision was made and said
and rightly so but we never ever can
make concessions to terrorists and
hostage takers and yet after sitting
through meeting after meeting he
endorsed that decision endorsed the sale
of arms to the Ayatollah in exchange for
hostages
one of the most tragic one of the most
mistaken foreign policy decisions we've
ever made in this country and I dare say
encouraged others to take hostages as we
now know so there can be no concessions
under any circumstances because if we do
it's an open open invitation to others
to do the same we've got to be tough on
international terrorism we've got to
treat it as international crime we've
got to attack it at all points we've got
to use undercover operations we have to
be prepared to use military force
against terrorist base camps we have to
work closely with our allies to make
sure that they're working with us and we
with them and we can give no quarter
when it comes to breaking the back of
international terrorism yes we should
make every effort try to try to help
those hostages come home but it can
never be because we make concessions
that was a tragic mistake that we made a
mistake that mr. Bush made and others
made and it should never ever be made
again mr. vice president I wrote the
anti-terrorist report for this
government it is the best anti-terrorist
report written yes we shouldn't trade
arms for hostages but we have made vast
improvements in our anti-terrorism now
it's fine to say that sometimes you have
to hit base camps but when the president
saw this state-sponsored
finger prints of Muammar Qaddafi on the
loss of American life he hit Libya and
my opponent was unwilling to support the
action and since that action of
terrorists terrorists action against the
United States citizens have gone down
and I have long ago said I supported the
President on this other matter and I've
said mistakes were made
clearly nobody's going to think the
president started out thinking he was
going to trade arms for hostages that is
a very serious charge against the
president matters been thoroughly looked
into but the point is sometimes the
intent the action has to be taken by the
federal government and when we took
action it had a favorable response a
question for the vice-president Peter it
seems that perhaps a good subject mr.
vice-president on which to make the
point that you've campaigned vigorously
as part of a leadership team but so far
you won't tell the American people in
considerable measure what advice you
gave the President on issues including
the sale of arms to Iran and what should
have been done about the hostages to the
best of my knowledge there's no
constitutional requirement which
prevents you from doing so Jimmy Carter
urged his Vice President Walter Mondale
to tell the American people would you
now ask President Reagan for permission
to tell the American people what advice
you did give him and if you don't how do
we judge your judgment in the Oval
Office in the last eight year you judged
by the whole record you judged by the
entire record are we closer to peace are
we doing better in anti-terrorism should
we have listened to my opponent who
wanted to send the UN into the Persian
Gulf or in spite of the mistakes of the
past are we doing better there how is
our credibility with the GCC countries
on the western side of the Gulf is Iran
talking to Iraq about peace you judge on
the record are the Soviets coming out of
Afghanistan how does it look in a
program he called phony or some one of
these marvelous Boston adjectives up
there and about Angola now we have a
chance now several Bostonians don't like
it but the rest of the country will
understand now we have a task
now we have a chance now we have a
chance and so I think that I'd leave it
right there and say that you judge on
the whole record and let me say this all
he can talk about he goes around running
about Noriega now I've told you what the
intelligence briefing he received said
about that he can talk about iran-contra
and I'll make a deal with you I will
take all the blame for those two
incidents if you give me half the credit
for all the good things that have
happened in world peace since Ronald
Reagan and I took over from the Carter
Administration
I still have it I still have a couple of
minutes left and there is a different
principle here I'm sorry mr. vice
president it's only on yellow here wait
a minute come on sorry I'm wrong go
ahead my apologies Jim you said nobody's
perfect I said I wasn't perfect you were
where was I
my apology 25th of December mr.
[Applause]
you can have another ten seconds if he
wants Jim no good yes I'll go ahead all
right all right
governor you have a minute to to respond
well the matter of judgment is very
important and I think it's important to
understand what happened here a report
on international terrorism chaired by
the vice president was released and made
some very specific recommendations about
how to deal with terrorism they were
ignored the vice president ignored says
mistakes were made very serious mistakes
in judgment were made he says well let's
concede that the administration has been
doing business with Noriega has made him
a part of our foreign policy and has
been funneling aid to the Contras who
convicted drug deals I think those are
very very serious questions of judgment
which those of you who are watching us
here tonight have a right to judge and
review we're not going to make those
kinds of mistakes you cannot make
concessions to terrorists if you do you
invite the taking of more hostages
that's a basic principle it was ignored
in that case and it was a very very
serious mistake of judgment who a
question from John mashuk it goes to the
vice president mr. vice president
Democrats and even some Republicans are
still expressing reservations about the
qualifications and credentials a senator
Dan Quayle of Indiana your chosen
running mate to be a heartbeat away from
the presidency what do you see in him
that others do not I see a meant young
man it was elected to the Senate twice
to the House of Representative twice I
see a man who is young and I am putting
my confidence in a whole generation of
people that are in their 30s and in
their 40s I see a man that took the
leadership in the job training
Partnership Act and that retrains people
in this highly competitive changing
society were in so if a person loses his
job he is retrained for a benefit for a
work that'll be productive and he won't
have to go on one of these many programs
that the Liberals we keep talking about
I see a young man who is a knowledgeable
in defense and our three people on our
ticket that are knowledgeable in the
whole in the race knowledgeable in
defense and Dan Quayle is one of them
and I am one of them and I believe that
he will be outstanding and he took a
tremendous pounding and everybody now
knows that he took a very unfair
pounding and I'd like each person to say
did I jump to conclusions
running down rumors that were so
outrageous and so brutal he's kept his
head up and he will do very very well
and he has my full confidence and he'll
have the confidence of people that are
in their 30s and 40s and more so judge
the man on his record not on a lot of
rumors and innuendo and trying to fool
around with his name my opponent says J
Danforth Quayle do you know who J
Danforth was he was a man that gave his
life in World War two so ridiculing a
person's name is a little beneath this
process and he'll do very well when we
get in
okay well when it comes to ridicule
George you want to go metal I think we
can agree on that but did I did I sense
a desire that maybe Lloyd Bentsen ought
to be your running mate and you said
that three people on your ticket no I
think the debate ought to be for
training ie I think the American people
have a right to judges on this question
on how we picked our running mate a
person who is a heartbeat away from the
presidency
I picked Lloyd Bentsen distinguished
strong mature a leader in the Senate
somebody whose qualifications nobody his
question mr. Bush picked Dan Quayle I
doubt very much the Dan Quayle was the
best qualified person for that job and
as a matter of fact I think for most
people the notion of president Quayle is
a very very troubling notion tonight all
right John will now ask a question of
the governor it will be the last
question and then the vice president
will have a rebuttal John well governor
you did select Lloyd Bentsen of Texas
Cindy and you have a lot of disagreement
with him on fundamental issues including
the Reagan tax cuts aid to the rebels in
Nicaragua the death penalty
gun control who's right well John I'm a
man that's been a chief executive for
ten years I picked a lot of people I
pick cabinets I've named judges I know
that the people you pick make an
enormous difference in your ability to
govern I set high standards I try to
meet them and I insist that people who
work for me meet them and if they don't
they don't stick around very long
but I didn't pick Lloyd Bentsen because
he was a claw a clone of Mike Dukakis I
picked him because he was somebody who
would be a strong vice president
somebody would be an active vice
president somebody who would come to me
if somebody came up with a crazy idea
that we got to trade arms the Ayatollah
for hostages and say mr. president
that's wrong we shouldn't do that
that's the kind of Vice President I want
he himself has said and rightly so that
it'll be a strong vice president but
when the president makes a decision that
will be his decision I'm very very proud
of that choice and I didn't pick him
because he agreed with me on everything
you know Sam Raven once said that if two
people agree on everything then only one
person is doing the thinking the fact is
that I've picked somebody who not only
will be a great vice president but if
God forbid something happens to the
president could step into that office
and do so with distinction and with
strength and with leadership I doubt
very much I doubt very much that mr.
Bush's selection for the vice presidency
of the United States meets that test
vice president
[Applause]
[Music]
we obviously have a difference I believe
it does meet the test we'll have an
opportunity to see the two of them in
action in a friendly form wonderful
friendly fashion life like this I'd
hoped that this had I'd hope this had
been a little friendlier in evening I'd
wanted to hitchhike a ride home and his
tank with him but I think now we're we
got the lines too too carefully drawn
here but you talk about judgment I mean
what kind of judgment
I mean jumping all over the president on
his decision on one era of foreign
policy what kind of judgment sends it
has your chief education advisor now in
jail in Massachusetts I mean I don't
think this is a fair argument but
nevertheless I support my nominee for
vice president and he'll do an
outstanding job gentlemen I was given
some bad word a moment ago there is time
for one more question
getting it in my ear and an grower will
ask you and President to the governor
sorry I'm so sorry governor Dukakis as
many US farmers face or undergo
foreclosure the United States is
considering the possibility of forgiving
a certain percentage of debt owed by
Latin American and third-world countries
do you favor giving these countries of
breaking their loans and if so how do
you explain that to the American farmers
who are losing their land and livelihood
well I think we have to go to work on
the problem of third-world debt and
we've got to assist those third world
countries in dealing with this massive
debt which they currently which they
have incurred and which is burdening
them and which we don't do something
about it and assist them along with
other nations around the world will
destroy their economy destroy their
future and at the same time will destroy
markets that are important to our
farmers well I also believe that we need
an agricultural policy which doesn't
cost us fifteen to twenty to twenty five
billion dollars a year that it's been
costing us over the course of the past
three or four years under this
administration I think it's going to
require good solid credit policies and
thanks to the Congress we now have an
agricultural credit bill which is
helping
improving the situation with at least
some of our farmers I think it's gonna
require a combination of Supply
Management and reasonable price supports
to make sure that our farmers get a
decent price and I think it also is
going to require an administration that
understands that that there that there
are tremendous opportunities out there
for the development of new uses for
agricultural products new uses which can
help us to clean up our environment at
the same time biodegradable plastic
plastic gasohol which the Vice President
himself has been involved in Road the
ice is made from corn products I mean
there are enormous opportunities out
there to expand markets and to build a
strong future for our farmers but I
don't think there's anything mutually
exclusive or contradictory about
building a strong farm economy in this
country and assisting our family farms
and providing a good strong future for
rural communities and for rural America
and at the same time working on
third-world debt as a matter of fact
Mexico itself is one of our biggest
agricultural customers so in the sense
that we can work to help Mexico rebuild
and expand and deal with its very
serious economic problems we help our
farmers at the same time mr. vice
president
I oppose supply management and
production controls
I support the farm bill the 85 farm bill
and it's spending is moving in the right
direction I want to expand our markets
abroad and that's why I've called for
that first economic summit to be on
agriculture I will not go back to the
way the Democrats did it and use food as
a political weapon and throw a grain
embargo on the farmers in this country I
want to see rural redevelopment and I
have been out front in favor of
alternate sources of energy and one of
them is gasohol and comes from using
your corn and I think we can do better
in terms of biodegradable for a lot of
products so I'm optimistic about the
agricultural economy in terms of the
third world
I support the Baker plant I want to see
market economies spring up all around
the world in to the degree they do we
are succeeding and I don't want to see
the banks let off the hook I would
oppose that but I think we're on the
right track in agriculture and I am very
very
courage but let's not go back to that
what they call Supply Management and
production control that will simply
price us out of the international market
let's try to expand our markets abroad
all right that really is the end now
let's go to closing statements there
will be they will be two minutes each
and duration by agreement vice president
Bush goes first governor Dukakis second
mr. vice president
I talked in New Orleans about a gentler
and kinder nation and I've made specific
proposals on education and the
environment on ethics and energy you
know how we do better in battling crime
in our country but there are two main
focal points of this election
opportunity and peace I want to keep
this expansion going yes we want change
but we are the change I am the change I
don't want to go back to malaise and
misery index and so opportunity keep
America at work the best poverty program
is a job with dignity in the private
sector and in terms of peace we are on
the right track we've achieved an arms
control agreement that our critics
thought was never possible and I want to
build on it I want to see us finalize
that start agreement and I want to be
the one to finally lead the world to
banishing chemical and biological
weapons I want to see asymmetrical
reductions in conventional forces and
then it gets down to a question of
values we've had a chance to spell out
our differences on the Pledge of
Allegiance here tonight and on tough
sentencing of drug kingpins and this
kind of thing I do favor the death
penalty we got a wide array of
differences on those but in the final
analysis in the final analysis person
goes into that voting booth they're
going to say who has the values I
believe in who has the experience that
we trust who has the integrity and the
stability to get the job done my fellow
Americans I am that man
and I ask for your support thank you
very much
[Applause]
governor to God
this has been an extraordinary 18 months
for Kitty and me and for our family
we've had an opportunity to campaign all
over this country to meet with so many
viewing communities states and regions
to get to know you I'm more optimistic
today than I was when I began about this
nation providing we have the kind of
leadership in Washington that can work
with you can build partnerships they can
build jobs in every part of this country
not certain parts of this country you
know my friends my parents came to this
country is as immigrants like millions
and millions of Americans before them
and since seeking opportunities seeking
the American dream
they made sure their sons understood
that this was the greatest country in
the world that those of us especially
were the sons and daughters of
immigrants had a special responsibility
to give something back to the country
that had opened up its arms to our
parents and given so much to them I
believe in the American dream I'm a
product of it and I want to help that
dream come true for every single citizen
in this land with a good job at good
wages with good schools in every part of
this country in every community in this
country with decent and affordable
housing that our people can buy and own
and live in so that we end the shame of
homelessness in America with decent and
affordable health care for all working
families yes it's a tough problem as mr.
Bush says but it's not an in solvable
problem it's one that we will solve and
must saw with a clean and wholesome
environment and with a strong America
that's strong militarily and
economically as we must be an America
that provides strong international
leadership because we're true to our
values we have an opportunity working
together to build that future to build a
better America to build a best America
because the best America doesn't hide we
compete the best America doesn't waste
we invest the best America doesn't leave
some of its citizens behind we live we
bring everybody along and the best
America is not behind us the best
America is yet to come thank you very
much
[Applause]
thank you
[Music]
John
so this first presidential